In a world populated by anthropomorphic mammals, Judy Hopps, a rabbit from rural Bunnyburrow, fulfills her dream of becoming the first rabbit officer in the police department of nearby city Zootopia. After graduating with the ceremony overseen by Mayor Leodore Lionheart, she is initially assigned parking duty by Chief Bogo who doubts her potential. During one of her shifts, she meets Nick Wilde and Finnick who are partners-in-crime.

Judy abandons her shift to arrest a thief, Duke Weaselton. She is reprimanded by Bogo and nearly fired, but her volunteering to investigate the case of Mrs. Otterton's missing husband and Assistant Mayor Dawn Bellwether reminding him of City Hall's Mammal Inclusion Program makes Bogo reluctantly agree to give her 48 hours, on the condition that she resign if she fails. She sees Nick in the last known photo of Otterton and tracks Nick down, blackmailing him into assisting her with the investigation by recording his confession to tax evasion.

After acquiring info from Yax and learning Mr. Otterton’s license plate number from Flash, Judy and Nick track the vehicle to crime boss Mr. Big. Mr. Big informs the pair that Otterton, his florist, had gone savage and attacked his chauffeur Manchas. Judy and Nick locate Manchas, who mentions that “night howlers” were responsible for attacking Otterton. Soon after, Manchas himself goes savage and chases the pair out of his home. When Bogo and his reinforcements arrive, Bogo demands Judy's resignation, but Nick takes a stand, insisting they have 10 more hours to solve the case. As the pair leaves, Judy learns from Nick that he was bullied by prey animals as a pup and became a criminal, believing that he would be stereotyped regardless, since no one saw foxes in any other way.

Judy and Nick consult Assistant Mayer Bellwether for access to the city’s traffic camera system to see how Machas disappeared. They identify the captors as wolves, which Judy believes Manchas and Otterton meant by “night howlers”. Judy and Nick locate Otterton and the missing mammals at Cliffside Asylum. All are predators and have gone savage like Manchas. After the two discover Mayor Lionheart consulting with Dr. Madge Honey Badger about the predators' condition, the pair escape with the evidence and the police swarm the area, arresting Lionheart and Dr. Honey Badger.

Having developed a friendship with Nick, Judy requests that he joins the Zootopia Police Department and become her partner, which Wilde happily considers. However, during a press conference, Judy mentions that the savage animals are predators and suggests that they may have gone back to their “original savage ways.” Nick is hurt and angrily walks out on her offer. Fear and discrimination against predators spread across Zootopia, protests spawn with one done by Gazelle, and a guilt-ridden Judy resigns.

Back in Bunnyburrow, Hopps learns from her former bully Gideon Grey that “night howlers” are flowers that have a severe psychotropic effect on mammals. Judy returns to Zootopia, reconciles with Nick, locates Weaselton, and learns that Weaselton has been collecting night howlers for a secret laboratory. The pair discover the lab and find sheep scientists creating a night howler serum which has been injected into predators via dart guns. Judy and Nick race to the ZPD with the evidence, but the sheep scientists pursue them.

Just short of the ZPD, the pair encounters Bellwether, who tries to take the evidence. Realizing Bellwether is the mastermind of a species-supremacist conspiracy, Judy and Nick try to flee, but Bellwether shoots a dart at Nick and calls the ZPD for help. Nick seemingly becomes savage and corners Judy, but it turns out the pair were acting and had swapped out Bellwether’s serum for blueberries. With Bellwether’s confession recorded on Judy’s carrot pen, the two have enough evidence to unravel the conspiracy. Bellwether and her accomplices are arrested for their crimes. Lionheart confesses his crime of illegally imprisoning the savaged predators for the "right reasons," but claims no knowledge of Bellwether's plot.

Months later, Judy is reinstated into the ZPD. The savage mammals are cured by an antidote. Inspired by Judy’s faith in him, Nick joins the ZPD as the first fox police officer and Judy’s new partner where they catch Flash drag-racing. During the credits, all of Zootopia enjoy a performance by Gazelle while Bellwether angrily watches the live streaming from prison.
